Deprecate df[col] and df[cols]` add `!` support (#1866)
JuliaData/DataFrames.jl: docs/src/lib/indexing.md

    * an `Integer` that is not `Bool`;
* a vector, later denoted as `rows`:
    * a vector of `Integer` other than `Bool` (does not have to be a subtype of `AbstractVector{<:Integer}`);
    * a vector of `Bool` that has to be a subtype of `AbstractVector{Bool}`;
    * a `Not` expression;
* a colon `:`;
* an exclamation mark `!`.

Additionally it is allowed to index into an `AbstractDataFrame` using a two dimensional `CartesianIndex`.

In the descriptions below `df` represents a `DataFrame`, `sdf` is a `SubDataFrame` and `dfr` is a `DataFrameRow`.

## `getindex` and `view`

The following list specifies return types of `getindex` operations depending on argument types.

In particular a description explicitly mentions that the data is *copied* or *reused without copying*.

For performance reasons, accessing, via `getindex` or `view`, a single `row` and multiple `cols` of a `DataFrame`, a `SubDataFrame` or a `DataFrameRow` always returns a `DataFrameRow` (which is a view-like type).

`DataFrame`:
* `df[CartesianIndex(row, col)]` -> the same as `df[row,col]`;
* `df[row, col]` -> the value contained in row `row` of column `col`, the same as `df[!, col][row]`;

> * `df[row, cols]` -> a `DataFrameRow` with parent `df` if `cols` is a colon and parent `df[!, cols]` otherwise;

Author: This is a delicate point. `df[!, :]` returns a copy of `df` and this is different because:
* it would be more expensive computationally (and we want to create `dfr` very cheaply)
* it would mean that when we mutate `df` (add/remove/rename columns) then `dfr` would not be mutated and it is mutated

> * `df[row, cols]` -> a `DataFrameRow` with parent `df` if `cols` is a colon and parent `df[!, cols]` otherwise;

Reviewer: Ah right `df[!, :]` doesn't copy vectors but it copies the data frame.

* `df[!, col]` -> the vector contained in column `col`; the same as `df.col` if `col` is a valid identifier;
* `df[!, cols]` -> a freshly allocated `DataFrame` containing vectors contained in columns `cols` (without copying of the vectors); the same as `select(df, cols, copycols=false)`;
* `@view df[CartesianIndex(row, col)]` -> the same as `@view df[row, col]`;
* `@view df[row, col]` -> a `0`-dimensional view into `df[!, col]`, the same as `view(df[!, col], row)`;
* `@view df[row, cols]` -> the same as `df[row, cols]`;
* `@view df[rows, col]` -> a view into `df[!, col]` with `rows` selected, the same as `view(df[!, col], rows)`;
* `@view df[rows, cols]` -> a `SubDataFrame` with `rows` selected with parent `df` if `cols` is a colon and `df[!, cols]` otherwise;
* `@view df[:, col]` -> a view into a whole `df[!, col]`, the same as `view(df[!, col], :)`;
* `@view df[:, cols]` -> a `SubDataFrame` with `rows` selected with parent `df` if `cols` is a colon and `df[!, cols]` otherwise;
* `@view df[!, col]` -> the same as `view(df, :, col)`;
* `@view df[!, cols]` -> the same as `view(df, :, cols)`.

`SubDataFrame`:

> * `sdf[CartesianIndex(row, col)]` -> the same as `sdf[row,col]`;

Author: fixed

* `sdf[row, col]` -> a value contained in row `row` of column `col`;
* `sdf[row, cols]` -> a `DataFrameRow` with parent `parent(sdf)` if `cols` is a colon and `parent(sdf)[cols]` otherwise;

> * `sdf[rows, col]` -> a subset of a vector `sdf[!, col]` with only rows `rows` selected;

Author: fixed

In particular a description explicitly mentions if the assignment is *in-place*.

`setindex!` on `DataFrame`:
* `df[row, col] = v` -> set value of `col` in row `row` to `v` in-place;
* `df[CartesianIndex(row, col)] = v` -> the same as `df[row, col] = v`;
* `df[row, cols] = v` -> set row `row` of columns `cols` in-place; the same as `dfr = df[row, cols]; dfr[:] = v`;
* `df[rows, col] = v` -> set rows `rows` of column `col` in-place; `v` must be an `AbstractVector`;
* `df[rows, cols] = v` -> set rows `rows` of columns `cols` in-place; `v` must be an `AbstractMatrix` or an `AbstractDataFrame`
                      (in this case column names must match);
* `df[!, col] = v` -> replaces `col` with `v` without copying
                      (with the exception that if `v` is an `AbstractRange` it gets converted to a `Vector`);
                      also if `col` is a `Symbol` that is not present in `df` then a new column in `df` is created and holds `v`;
                      equivalent to `df.col = v` if `col` is a valid identifier;

Note in particular that only `df[!, col] = v` and `df.col = v` can be used to add a new column to a `DataFrame`.

> In particular `df[:, col] = v` does not add a column `v` to a `DataFrame` as it is in-place operation.

Author: This is not allowed. An error will be thrown. Literal `:` in row selection is treated the same as `1:nrow(df)` so it is in-place only. Clarification added.

`setindex!` on `SubDataFrame`:
* `sdf[row, col] = v` -> set value of `col` in row `row` to `v` in-place;
* `sdf[CartesianIndex(row, col)] = v` -> the same as `sdf[row, col] = v`;
* `sdf[row, cols] = v` -> the same as `dfr = df[row, cols]; dfr[:] = v` in-place;

> * `sdf[rows, col] = v` -> set rows `rows` of column `col`, in-place; `v` can be an abstract vector;

Author: must be. Fixed

    * a vector of `Bool` that has to be a subtype of `AbstractVector{Bool}`;
    * a regular expression, which gets expanded to a vector of matching column names;
    * a `Not` expression;
    * a colon `:`.

The rules for a valid type of index into a row are the following:
* a value, later denoted as `row`:
    * an `Integer` that is not `Bool`;
* a vector, later denoted as `rows`:
    * a vector of `Integer` other than `Bool` (does not have to be a subtype of `AbstractVector{<:Integer}`);
    * a vector of `Bool` that has to be a subtype of `AbstractVector{Bool}`;
    * a `Not` expression;
* a colon `:`;
* an exclamation mark `!`.

Additionally it is allowed to index into an `AbstractDataFrame` using a two dimensional `CartesianIndex`.

In the descriptions below `df` represents a `DataFrame`, `sdf` is a `SubDataFrame` and `dfr` is a `DataFrameRow`.

Note that `df.col` works like `df[!, col]` when getting column from an `AbstractDataFrame` or broadcasting into `df.col`,
but it works like `df[:, col]` when used in setting column context. This behavior was chosen
as this kind of behavior is typically expected as a reasonable default.

## `getindex` and `view`

> The following list specifies return types of `getindex` and `view` operations depending on argument types.

Reviewer: Not just return types: the behavior is fully specified. Same for `setindex!`.

Author: fixed

* `@view sdf[rows, col]` -> translates to `view(sdf[!, col], rows)` (a standard view into `sdf[!, col]` vector);
* `@view sdf[rows, cols]` -> a `SubDataFrame` with parent `parent(sdf)` if `cols` is a colon and `parent(sdf)[!, cols]` otherwise;
* `@view sdf[:, col]` -> the same as `sdf[!, col]`;
* `@view sdf[:, cols]` -> the same as `sdf[!, cols]`;
* `@view sdf[!, col]` -> the same as `sdf[!, col]`;
* `@view sdf[!, cols]` -> the same as `sdf[!, cols]`.

`getindex` on `DataFrameRow`:
* `dfr[col]` -> the value contained in column `col` of `dfr`; the same as `dfr.col` is `col` is a valid identifier;
* `dfr[cols]` -> a `DataFrameRow` with parent `parent(dfr)` if `cols` is a colon and `parent(dfr)[cols]` otherwise;

`view` on `DataFrameRow`:
* `@view dfr[col]` -> a `0`-dimensional view into `parent(dfr)[DataFrames.row(dfr), col]`;
* `@view dfr[cols]` -> a `DataFrameRow` with parent `parent(dfr)` if `cols` is a colon and `parent(dfr)[cols]` otherwise;

Note that when views are created with columns selector set to `:` then the view produced dynamically changes its columns'

> names and count if columns of parents are added/removed/renamed;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
names and count if columns are added/removed/renamed in the parent;
```

## `setindex!`

The following list specifies return types of `setindex!` operations depending on argument types.

In particular a description explicitly mentions if the assignment is *in-place*,

> *replaces old vectors without copying source* or *replaces old vectors with copying source*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*replaces old vectors without copying source* or *replaces old vectors copying source*.
```

`setindex!` on `DataFrame`:
* `df[CartesianIndex(row, col)] = v` -> the same as `df[row, col] = v`;
* `df[row, col] = v` -> set value of `col` in row `row` to `v` in-place;

> * `df[row, cols] = v` -> the same as `dfr = df[row, cols]; dfr[:] = v` in-place;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[row, cols] = v` -> set row `row` of columns `cols` in-place; the same as `dfr = df[row, cols]; dfr[:] = v`;
```

> * `df[rows, col] = v` -> set rows `rows` of column `col` in-place; `v` can be an abstract vector;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[rows, col] = v` -> set rows `rows` of column `col` in-place; `v` must be an `AbstractVector`;
```

> * `df[rows, cols]` -> set rows `rows` of columns `cols` in-place; `v` can be an `AbstractMatrix` or `v` can be `AbstractDataFrame`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[rows, cols]` -> set rows `rows` of columns `cols` in-place; `v` must be an `AbstractMatrix` or an `AbstractDataFrame`
```

                      (in this case column names must match);

> * `df[:, col] = v` -> the same as `df[1:nrow(df), col] = v` but replaces old vectors with a copy of source;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[:, col] = v` -> similar to `df[1:nrow(df), col] = v` but replaces old vector with a copy of `v`;
```
Same below.

                      the same as `df.col = v` if `col` is a valid identifier;

>                       also if `col` is a `Symbol` that is not present in `df` then a new column in `df` is created;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                      if `col` is a `Symbol` that is not present in `df` then a new column is added to `df`;
```
Same below.

* `df[:, cols] = v` -> the same as `df[1:nrow(df), cols] = v` but replaces old vectors with a copy of source;
* `df[!, col] = v` -> the same as `df[1:nrow(df), col] = v` but replaces old vectors without copying source;
                      also if `col` is a `Symbol` that is not present in `df` then a new column in `df` is created without copying of source;

> * `df[!, cols] = v` -> the same as `df[1:nrow(df), cols] = v` but replaces old vectors without copying source if `v` is an `AbstractDataFrame`.

Reviewer: So this means no copy is made for `SubDataFrame`?

Author: This rule is for `df`. For `sdf` there is a separate rule below `sdf[!, cos] = v` is an in-place operation.

Reviewer: I'm referring to
> if `v` is an `AbstractDataFrame`.

It would be weird when `v` is a `SubDataFrame` to set columns of `df` to be `SubArray`s. OTOH maybe people shouldn't use `!` in that case. Not sure.

Author: I agree it is weird. But the same will happen with
```
foreach(col -> df[!, col] = sdf[!, col], axes(df, 2))
```
which is essentially the same operation (but without checking that the column names match).

The reason for this problem is that we allow to store in `DataFrame` any `AbstractVector` and not restrict it to `Vector`.

`setindex!` on `SubDataFrame`:
* `sdf[CartesianIndex(row, col)] = v` -> the same as `sdf[row, col] = v`;
* `sdf[row, col]` -> set value of `col` in row `row` to `v` in-place;
* `sdf[row, cols]` -> the same as `dfr = df[row, cols]; dfr[:] = v` in-place;
* `sdf[rows, col]` -> set rows `rows` of column `col` in-place; `v` can be an abstract vector;
* `sdf[rows, cols]` -> set rows `rows` of columns `cols` in-place;
                       `v` can be an `AbstractMatrix` or `v` can be `AbstractDataFrame` when column names must match;

> * `sdf[:, col]` -> the same as `sdf[1:nrow(df), col] = v`; the same as `sdf.col = v` if `col` is a valid identifier;

Reviewer: These are somewhat inconsistent with what happens with `DataFrame`, where columns are replaced. Maybe we should require using `1:end` or `.=`?

Author: I had a problem what to do with these cases. The rules are inconsistent, but it is not possible to make them consistent (we can do only in-place operation).
I have added these rules because you can have code and then add `@view` in front of it later. Without these rules such an operation would break the code.

In order to be consistent we would have to drop special handling of `:` and `!` for `DataFrame`, but I understand we do not want this.

Reviewer: How about making these throw an error that points to `1:end` and `.=` for now? It sounds like a good idea to force users to use a different syntax from `DataFrame` here since the result is completely different. They should use a syntax that does in-place column setting both on `DataFrame` and `SubDataFrame`.

Author: OK - we can disallow it. We can always introduce it later if needed (I will update the docs for this case). In general setting whole columns of `SubDataFrame` is I guess a corner case that rarely happens in practice.

The only problem is that it covers `sdf.col = v` case which we should allow and it will be inconsistent (`sdf.col = v` is in place while `df.col = v` replaces with copy).

Also we still have an inconsistency that `df[:, col] .= v` allocates fresh columns while `sdf[:, col] .= v` is in place.

The problem is that in order to make this consistent we would have to make `:` in-place always. This is doable, but then we should have this `setcol!` function for column replacement and drop the whole `!` idea as it will be redundant then.

So the choice is:
1. use current design with `:` and `!` as it does what users expect most of the time (but either gives some inconsistency or is disallowed in some cases)
2. be strict with consistency and add `setcol!`

I think option 1. is better (we will still have inconsistency between `df.col = v` and `sdf.col = v` anyway if we go for option 2.). Then the question is if in option 1. we minimize inconsistency (by disallowing certain operations - your current proposal) or simply accept the inconsistency (this is the current state in the docs).

* `sdf[:, cols]` -> the same as `sdf[1:nrow(df), cols] = v`;
* `sdf[!, col]` -> the same as `sdf[1:nrow(df), col] = v`;
* `sdf[!, cols]` -> the same as `sdf[1:nrow(df), cols] = v`;

`setindex!` on `DataFrameRow`:
* `dfr[col] = v` -> set value of `col` in row `row` to `v` in-place;
* `dfr[cols] = v` -> set values of entries in columns `cols` in `dfr` by elements of `v` in place;
                     `v` can be an `AbstractVector` or `v` can be a `NamedTuple` or `DataFrameRow` when column names must match;

## Broadcasting

The following broadcasting rules apply to `AbstractDataFrame` objects:
* `AbstractDataFrame` behaves in broadcasting like a two-dimensional collection compatible with matrices.
* If an `AbstractDataFrame` takes part in broadcasting then a `DataFrame` is always produced as a result.
  In this case the requested broadcasting operation produces an object with exactly two dimensions.
  An exception is when an `AbstractDataFrame` is used only as a source of broadcast assignment into an object
  of dimensionality higher than two.
* If multiple `AbstractDataFrame` objects take part in broadcasting then they have to have identical column names.

> Broadcasting `DataFrameRow` is currently not allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Broadcasting `DataFrameRow` is currently not allowed (which is consistent with `NamedTuple`).
```

                     the same as `df[!, col][rows]`;
* `df[rows, cols]` -> a `DataFrame` containing copies of columns `cols` with only the entries corresponding to `rows` selected;
* `df[!, col]` -> the vector contained in column `col` returned without copying; the same as `df.col` if `col` is a valid identifier.

> * `df[!, cols]` -> the same as `select(df, cols, copycols=false)`.

Reviewer: Also describe what this does? Indexing is more fundamental than `select`.

Author: Added here and below. Thank you.

                      (with the exception that if `v` is an `AbstractRange` it gets converted to a `Vector`);
                      also if `col` is a `Symbol` that is not present in `df` then a new column in `df` is created and holds `v`;
                      equivalent to `df.col = v` if `col` is a valid identifier;

> * `df[!, cols] = v` -> currently is disallowed, but its support is planned do be added in the future;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[!, cols] = v` -> is currently disallowed, but is planned to be supported in the future;
```

    The rule above means that, similar to single-dimensional objects in Base (e.g. vectors),
    `DataFrameRow` is considered to be column-oriented.

Additional rules:
* in the `df[CartesianIndex(row, col)] .= v`, `df[row, col] .= v` and `df[row, cols] .= v` syntaxes the assignment to `df` is performed in-place;
* in the `df[rows, col] .= v` and `df[rows, cols] .= v` syntaxes the assignment to `df` is performed in-place;
* in the `df[!, col] .= v` syntax column `col` is replaced by a freshly allocated vector; if `col` is `Symbol` and it is missing from `df` then a new column is added;

> * `df[!, cols] = v` syntax currently is disallowed, but its support is planned do be added in the future;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `df[!, cols] = v` syntax is currently disallowed, but is planned to be supported in the future;
```

    The rule above means that, similar to single-dimensional objects in Base (e.g. vectors),
    `DataFrameRow` is considered to be column-oriented.

> Additional rules:

Reviewer: This list is quite repetitive. How about listing the syntaxes which are in-place and those which aren't instead?

Author: I agree, but please leave it as is for now. I need it to write proper tests (and someone later checking the tests will need it to make sure that we have proper test coverage).

I propose to shorten the list after we are done with implementation and review of tests.

* in the `df[CartesianIndex(row, col)] .= v`, `df[row, col] .= v` and `df[row, cols] .= v` syntaxes the assignment to `df` is performed in-place;

> * in the `df[rows, col] .= v` and `df[rows, cols] .= v` syntaxes the assignment to `df` is performed in-place;

Reviewer: Why not merge this with the previous line?

Author: The same reason as above - I need it to make sure I do not miss anything when writing tests. Later we can merge them
